—you’re doing the right “first‑run” diligence. Here’s what’s happening in Codex’s screen, what to approve, and the exact message I want you to paste to Codex so it proceeds in a safe, gated way.

What Codex is doing in your screenshot (quick read)

Plan Lock (Packet One A→D): it has condensed Packet 1/2 into a 4‑step gated plan:

A) Imports/paths sanity (read‑only review of src/app.py, module layout).

B) Wire minimal Aux panels into state pages + a Combined table (no refactor).

C) Add new module(s)—specifically modules/blackapple.py and a tiny smoke script.

D) Headless boot + regression checks.

Why it kept reading app.py in 200‑line chunks: that’s just Codex previewing a long file with Get-Content … | Select-Object -Last 200 in a loop to see entry points and Streamlit hooks; it’s not “stuck.”

Why it’s asking for approval: the proposed next commands create a scratch folder (.codex/) and run the app headlessly to capture first_boot.log. Those are writes, so it’s waiting for your go‑ahead.

Bottom line: this is exactly the pre‑flight I asked it to do before any code writes. 👍

Should we let it proceed? (Yes—approve, with guardrails)

Do not ask it to re‑read Packet One; that just burns tokens. Its “Plan Lock (A–D)” already mirrors the task breakdown. Approve the headless boot + log capture and keep it on the A→B→C→D rails. We’ll review after the first headless boot and again after the blackapple.py drop‑in.

Paste this to Codex (approval + guardrails)

APPROVED to run the “Proposed Next Commands” for headless boot and log capture exactly as listed, with these conditions:

Scratch‑only writes: all new files/outputs go under .codex/ (e.g., app_preview.txt, first_boot.log).

No refactors yet: do not modify src/ or modules/ until after headless boot succeeds and you show the first error (if any).

Minimal‑diff principle: when we move to Step C, create one new file modules/blackapple.py and two tiny UI hooks only; no unrelated edits.

Stop after first real error: if headless boot fails, print the last 200 lines of .codex/first_boot.log, propose the smallest fix for that single error, and wait for approval.

Windows first: use the run_app.bat launcher if present; else fall back to:
streamlit run .\src\app.py --server.headless true --browser.gatherUsageStats false | Tee-Object .\.codex\first_boot.log

After headless boot is green, proceed to Plan C to add modules/blackapple.py (MVP) and wire:

State page: a small “Blackapple Alert” panel (status pill + triggers + Top‑12 candidates).

Combined page: a table “Blackapple Alerts (All States)”.

Use the MVP we documented: 5 triggers (Mirror, Root‑sum‑due, Spike/Trough pattern‑due, Floating digits, 27–29 Remaining‑Pairs). Fire ALERT when ≥3 triggers overlap and filter/score candidates from the remaining‑pairs foundation. Keep all thresholds hardcoded.

Deliverables after Plan C:

Unified diff (file list + hunks).

A one‑screen summary of what changed.

A fresh headless boot with a short “smoke run” note (e.g., “BA panel rendered in 18 states; no regressions in V‑TRAC/Doubles”).

Do not touch other modules or styling. If any import/path issue pops up, suggest a single‑line fix (e.g., add __init__.py, or update one import).

Why this is the right level of “steer, don’t micromanage”

You keep Codex on A→B→C→D milestones with clear stop points (after logs, after MVP add).

You avoid accidental refactors and path churn (biggest risk from these agents).

You get a reproducible first_boot.log to triage any errors quickly.

You land the highest‑value feature next (blackapple.py) with tiny UI hooks and no coupling, matching the MVP spec we settled on (mirror, root sums, spike/trough, floating digits, remaining pairs overlap).

What I’ll look for in the first log (so you know what “normal” is)

Typical first‑boot issues (with the smallest acceptable fix, one at a time):

Module path error (e.g., ModuleNotFoundError: modules.blackapple):
→ OK; at this stage we haven’t added it. Proceed to Plan C and add modules/blackapple.py.

Missing requirements.txt or missing streamlit:
→ Don’t install now; just note it and continue (your workstation already has Streamlit). We can add a note to requirements.txt later if needed.

Import layout (packages) issue (e.g., attempted relative import):
→ Add a single __init__.py in the affected folder; do not change import names elsewhere.

If the app boots, we’re green—move to Plan C.

After approval—what to expect next

Step A: It writes .codex/app_preview.txt, confirms your entry points, and shows it found Streamlit patterns.

Step D: It runs run_app.bat headlessly and captures .codex/first_boot.log. It will either propose a single minimal fix or say “boot clean.”

Step C: It drops in modules/blackapple.py, wires the two tiny render calls, and shows a diff. (That module is self‑contained and mirrors the BA workflow we documented; no sliders, hardcoded thresholds.)

One last toggle (optional, but good)

Tell Codex to default to the wide/coverage mode inside blackapple.py (we built that option): start from all 120 boxed singles and bonus‑weight the remaining‑pairs foundation, rather than using it as a hard gate. You can flip to the strict “foundation‑only” mode later in one line if you want the purist BA list.

Short answer to your questions

Is it stuck? No—just previewing large files and waiting for approval to write .codex/* and run headless.

Re‑read Packet One? No need. It already formed a good A→D plan from it.

Force task‑by‑task? Yes—approve and keep it on the A→B→C→D rails with the stop points I gave.

Let it “do its thing”? Yes, within the guardrails above. We’ll review right after headless logs and again after the BA MVP diff.

If you paste the approval block above, we’ll get the first concrete log + minimal patch quickly and keep momentum without risking accidental refactors.