Yes—these two workflows are supposed to be different, and their eventual reunion is the project’s main development engine

I created a durable version of this explanation and the Git-stabilization plan here:

AAT9_DUAL_WORKFLOW_REUNION_AND_GIT_STABILIZATION_2026-08-05.md

The simplest framing is:

MASTER DEEP REVIEW:
What did the current programmed system do?

EXTRACTION-ZONE REVIEW:
What should a pathway-first analyst or future extraction engine have seen?

REUNION / HARNESS:
Which difference deserves to become code?

They are not rival templates. They are two different lenses that eventually drive one evidence-based development loop.

Part I — Master Deep Review versus Extraction-Zone Review
1. The Master Deep Review is the current-system forensic workflow

The established AAT9 workflow is built around a frozen D‑1 world snapshot, tool outputs produced before the target result, and winner logging afterward. The project’s own SSOT says strings lead, Aux compounds, sharepacks preserve immutable snapshots, and results are graded only after the earlier brain outputs exist.

Its role is to answer:

What did Stable produce?

What did Digit Reduction expose?

What did V-TRAC preserve?

What did Hot Zones mark?

What did AUX / AUX CORE reinforce?

What did Arena aggregate or promote?

What did Sandbox translate?

What did Candidate Universe retain?

What did Play Card make available, default, select, or fund?

At what identity level did the result survive?

Where was the first material loss?

The established template already separates:

Part 1 — environment/winner lens
Part 2 — current analytical tools
Part 3 — auxiliary/context evidence

and places the completed answers into state/date run reports rather than modifying the blank template itself.

Permanent MDR purpose

MDR should be capped as:

CURRENT-SYSTEM FORENSIC, ACCEPTANCE,
REGRESSION, AND DEVELOPMENT-DIAGNOSIS WORKFLOW v1

It is not required to become the future extraction brain.

Its permanent strengths are:

source and timing verification;
tool-by-tool inventory;
evidence lineage;
route and width auditing;
current-system conversion trace;
first-loss diagnosis;
regression comparison before and after system changes;
structured “preserve / fix / test / defer / no action” decisions.
2. The Extraction-Zone Review is the independent pathway benchmark

This workflow asks a different question:

What could a pathway-first analytical system identify directly from the three-variant string environment without being anchored by the current tool conclusions?

Its first pass should use:

Midday, Evening, and Combined R2/R4/R6/R8 tables;
the authoritative Zone 1 coordinates;
the authoritative Zone 2 coordinates;
the Zone 3 survivor/repeat/maturity doctrine;
permitted pre-result draw digits and reduction clocks;
no winner-derived highlighting or result-conditioned conclusions during the predictive freeze.

It should produce:

candidate-family inventory
Zone 1 feeder pathways
Zone 2 progression/current-frontier pathways
Zone 3 survivor and trigger events
reduction receipts
candidate merit
competitor burden
box / VTRAC / ordered / exact routes
state opportunity or abstention

After those outputs are frozen, the result is revealed and the review becomes winner-aware:

What was captured?

At what identity level?

What was missed?

What caused convey?

Was the missed clue actually selectable before the result?

What new mechanism should be tested?

How many non-winning candidates would that same mechanism create?

The project’s Deep Review insights already formalized the complementary roles:

Part A:
what a strong analyst sees

Part B:
the measurable profile of that environment

Section 2:
whether the programmed system captured, scored,
aggregated, and translated that profile

They also preserve the crucial distinction between discovery and proof:

Winner-aware review is valuable for discovering mechanisms, but generalization requires a frozen method and untouched examples.

Part II — Why both workflows are necessary
MDR cannot discover everything the future system is missing

MDR is excellent at analyzing the system that exists.

But it is naturally bounded by:

the features the tools already calculate;
the candidate objects Arena already knows how to represent;
the routes current downstream systems already form;
the output schemas currently available.

A missing concept such as:

typed terminal survivor
feeder-to-frontier bridge
reduction concentration gain
pattern-maturity state
order-lane competition
candidate-prevalence burden

may not be visible as a current-system failure because the current system may not represent it at all.

That is why an independent extraction analysis is needed.

Extraction Review cannot diagnose the implementation layer by itself

The extraction review may say:

Candidate family 019 should have been a top box route.

But it cannot, by itself, tell you whether:

Stable never saw it;
Digit Reduction saw it but scored it weakly;
Arena preserved it but failed to promote it;
Sandbox translated the wrong identity;
Candidate Universe retained it too broadly;
Play Card had it but did not select it;
the route was selected but not funded.

That requires MDR.

So:

Extraction Review discovers the missing intelligence.

MDR locates the implementation gap.
Part III — The eventual reunion

The reunion is the “massive main process” you are describing.

Per outcome
1. Freeze the historical D‑1 snapshot.

2. Run the present AAT9 tools and freeze current-system outputs.

3. Run the independent extraction review and freeze:
   candidates, ranks, burden, routes, and state class.

4. Reveal the result.

5. Grade both systems at:
   exact,
   canonical box,
   ordered VTRAC,
   boxed VTRAC.

6. Perform the MDR current-system autopsy.

7. Perform the extraction/convey autopsy.

8. Build a reconciliation record.

9. Classify the development implication.

10. Select bounded harness candidates.
Reconciliation matrix
Extraction benchmark	Current system	Meaning	Development action
Found pathway	Found and converted	Existing capability works	Preserve
Found pathway	Tool found; Arena underused	Synthesis/promotion gap	Arena-thinking harness
Found pathway	Arena preserved; no route	Translation gap	Route harness
Found pathway	Tools missed	Missing detector	New extraction feature hypothesis
Both find broad territory only	Poor compression	Candidate-burden/ranking gap	Compression harness
Both find no selective route	Correct restraint	Preserve abstention	
Appears only after reveal	Hindsight-only insight	Post-result hypothesis	
Across the whole Gold Day

Aggregate:

mechanism activations
hits and misses
candidate widths
equal-or-stronger competitors
state opportunity classes
abstention quality
first-loss stages
tool/AUX contribution
cross-state prevalence
time-to-convey
false-positive pathways

Then every finding ends as:

CONFIRMED_EXISTING_STRENGTH
CONFIRMED_REPORTING_FIX
FIX_CANDIDATE
ENHANCEMENT_CANDIDATE
TRANSLATION_HYPOTHESIS
NEW_MODULE_HYPOTHESIS
HARNESS_CANDIDATE
DEFERRED_ARCHITECTURE
NO_ACTION
Part IV — Harness testing is the bridge into system development

The intended development loop should be:

winner-aware mechanism discovery
→ exact mechanism contract
→ isolated shadow implementation
→ frozen pre-result replay
→ matched-width baseline comparison
→ negative and shuffled controls
→ untouched Gold Day holdout
→ live shadow
→ controlled integration

The project’s existing Workflow Standard already calls for small explicit plans, reversible changes, compile/smoke validation, documentation, and regression coverage for every new feature.

The same standard’s example-driven optimization loop says to preserve all artifacts and inputs, log observations, file the smallest follow-up tasks, and add a regression test for each new feature.

Examples of shadow comparisons
Extraction mechanism
CURRENT SYSTEM
EXTRACTION V2
CURRENT + EXTRACTION
SHUFFLED / RANDOM CONTROL
FEATURE ABLATIONS
AUX contribution
STRING_ONLY
AUX_ONLY
STRING_PLUS_AUX
STRING_PLUS_SHUFFLED_AUX
Reduction
NO REDUCTION
OWN-DRAW REMOVE-ONE
OWN-DRAW REMOVE-ALL
SECOND-CLOCK REMOVE-ONE
SECOND-CLOCK REMOVE-ALL
MIRROR FALLBACK
SHUFFLED-DIGIT CONTROL

A mechanism should only enter the system after it proves incremental value at comparable candidate width and survives a holdout.

Part V — Will the two workflows eventually become one?
Yes—but not by deleting MDR

The likely progression is:

Early phase

Keep them deliberately separate:

MDR:
current-system forensic lens

Extraction Review:
independent pathway benchmark
Middle phase

Validated extraction mechanisms become typed first-class objects inside Arena:

FEEDER_TO_FRONTIER_BRIDGE
TERMINAL_SURVIVOR
REDUCTION_CONCENTRATION_GAIN
CURRENT_VERTICAL_ALIGNMENT
ORDER_LANE_DOMINANCE
COMPETITOR_COLLAPSE

The existing tools become specialized evidence providers for those objects.

Mature phase

The live architecture becomes:

RAW TABLES
→ CURRENT EVIDENCE SERVICES + EXTRACTION ENGINE
→ ARENA / EXTRACTION-CONVEY SYNTHESIS
→ TYPED ROUTE TRANSLATION
→ STATE OPPORTUNITY OR ABSTENTION
→ FROZEN PREDICTION
→ RESULT GRADING
→ MDR / HARNESS LEARNING LOOP

The current workflow documentation already anticipates a future aggregator/superbrain after string tools and Aux, followed by winner logging and persistent metrics.

Future MDR becomes leaner

Eventually MDR may only need:

source and cutoff validation;
extraction-event receipts;
system-surface trace;
route/state decision audit;
result grading;
regression comparison;
action queue.

The separate maximum-depth extraction review may then be reserved for:

Gold Days;
novel environments;
major system changes;
regressions;
research windows;
difficult or contradictory cases.

So your instinct is correct:

Eventually, some integrated version of the template process may be enough for routine operation—but only after the extraction doctrine has been validated and embedded as first-class system logic.

Part VI — My assessment of Codex’s Git stabilization proposal
Overall verdict: approve it, with several refinements

Codex’s plan is about 90% correct.

This should be called:

PRESERVATION-FIRST GIT STABILIZATION SPRINT

—not a conventional cleanup.

The reported state creates real operational risk:

240 modified tracked files
25 apparent deletions
7,019 untracked files
approximately 2 GB untracked
four worktrees
three dirty worktrees
important research truth ignored under tasks/
61 local branches
large .codex and sharepacks directories

Those figures are from the Codex audit you pasted; I have not independently inspected the Git worktree in this response.

Why now is an excellent breakpoint

You are between major phases:

Gold Day 1:
completed but contaminated by the old Zone 2 map

V2 backlog:
frozen

Gold Day 2:
not started

This is exactly when to protect history before opening a new experimental branch.

The important changes I would make to Codex’s plan
1. Codex should not push

The workflow architecture explicitly says Codex should avoid push, pull, fetch, and remote changes; checkpoints should use your manual GitHub Desktop workflow.

Therefore:

Codex:
prepares and verifies the checkpoint

You:
push manually through GitHub Desktop

The two committed-but-unpushed commits should be remotely protected before deeper stabilization—but manually.

2. Do not broadly unignore tasks/

Codex correctly identified that important durable truth is hidden because all of tasks/ is ignored.

But I would not solve that by force-adding thousands of task files or unignoring the entire directory.

Instead, establish a tracked canonical path such as:

docs/AAT9_KIT/RESEARCH_CHECKPOINTS/2026-08-05/

Promote only the durable records:

MDR workflow checkpoint
Core Extraction/Convey Training Log
Deep Example Review Journal milestone
authoritative zone doctrine
Gold Day 1 contamination notice
frozen V2 backlog
contracts
compact acceptance receipts
source/regeneration manifests

Keep tasks/ as working/scratch space.

This prevents the same project truth from remaining hidden indefinitely and avoids turning Git into an archive of temporary execution files.

3. Create a safety ref before switching anything

Before changing branches:

record current branch
record exact HEAD
create checkpoint branch/ref from that HEAD
record all worktrees
save selective critical-file hashes

Recommended checkpoint branch:

checkpoint/deep-review-extraction-v1-2026-08-05

Creating the branch does not itself preserve uncommitted files, so the inventory and selective backup still matter.

4. Reconcile the 25 deletions by hash

Codex is right that several apparent deletions may actually be moves into ignored folders.

For each deleted tracked file:

find suspected replacement
compare SHA-256
classify:
    true deletion
    rename/move
    duplicate
    unresolved

Do not commit the deletion until this is known.

This is especially important because Git cannot infer a rename when the destination remains ignored and unstaged.

5. Thematic commits are right—but do not force artificial splits

A sensible commit sequence is:

1. table/value integrity and path repairs
2. AUX CORE and Positional harness
3. MDR / Arena / deep-review execution tooling
4. extraction-zone and Gold Day tooling
5. durable research documents/contracts/manifests
6. ignore-rule refinements

However, code, tests, fixtures, and required documentation that must pass together should stay together.

The goal is:

coherent tested commits

not:

many commits that temporarily break the repository
6. Preserve each dirty worktree independently

Do not remove detached replay worktrees merely because their branches appear merged.

For each worktree:

record HEAD
record status
record diff inventory
identify unique files
create/confirm branch or safety ref
commit coherent work or save a replay recipe/patch
verify recoverability
only then consider removal

Branch cleanup comes later.

7. Test after every coherent commit

At minimum:

python -m py_compile
targeted pytest
relevant acceptance/smoke
git diff --check
artifact-stage audit

Because src/app.py is modified, Codex is correct that a headless app smoke should be required before the final checkpoint.

The project standard already requires compile, import probes, relevant smoke checks, and documentation after changes.

8. Tag only after validation

Create annotated tags only after:

all intended commits are present;
targeted and broader tests pass;
the branch is manually pushed;
the critical research docs are tracked;
the staged/generated boundary is verified.

Suggested milestones:

aat9-mdr-v1-checkpoint-2026-08-05
aat9-extraction-pre-v2-2026-08-05

Then create:

research/extraction-zone-v2

from that stabilized commit.

9. Defer disk and branch cleanup

Codex is correct:

Do not clean .codex now.
Do not clean 36 GB of sharepacks now.
Do not prune 59 merged branches now.

Later, create a retention policy:

keep golden and holdout sharepacks
keep manifests and hashes
keep regeneration commands
archive or remove verified duplicates
remove only proven-regenerable temporary artifacts

The absence of disk pressure means there is no reason to take deletion risk before preservation.

Git stabilization definition of done
[ ] Two committed changes pushed manually

[ ] Purpose-named checkpoint branch created

[ ] Full machine-readable preservation inventory saved

[ ] Critical ignored research truth promoted to tracked canonical paths

[ ] All 25 apparent deletions reconciled

[ ] Source changes committed in coherent tested groups

[ ] Bulk generated artifacts excluded

[ ] Every dirty worktree independently preserved

[ ] Targeted tests and broader relevant tests pass

[ ] Headless app smoke passes

[ ] Stabilized branch pushed manually

[ ] Milestone tags created

[ ] Clean research/extraction-zone-v2 branch created

Only after this should you resume the V2 backlog and Gold Day 2.

Paste-ready direction for Codex
PROCEED WITH PRESERVATION-FIRST GIT STABILIZATION ONLY.

Do not implement Extraction V2.
Do not change runtime behavior.
Do not clean generated directories yet.
Do not prune branches yet.
Do not remove worktrees yet.
Do not run git clean, reset, or a giant stash.
Do not perform remote operations.

1. Produce a read-only machine inventory of:
   branch/HEAD, remotes, divergence, worktrees, tracked changes,
   deletions, ignored critical files, untracked families, sizes and hashes.

2. Prepare the two existing commits for manual GitHub Desktop push.

3. Create checkpoint/deep-review-extraction-v1-2026-08-05
   from the current committed HEAD.

4. Reconcile every apparent deletion using path and SHA-256 comparisons.

5. Promote only durable research truth into a tracked
   docs/AAT9_KIT/RESEARCH_CHECKPOINTS/2026-08-05/ location.
   Do not broadly unignore tasks/.

6. Propose coherent thematic commits with exact file lists,
   dependencies and required tests before staging.

7. Preserve each dirty worktree independently.

8. Run targeted tests per commit and a final broader suite.
   Because src/app.py changed, require a headless app smoke.

9. Stop for human review before committing/pushing tags.

After the user manually pushes the stabilized branch and creates the
milestone tags, create research/extraction-zone-v2 from the stabilized commit.
Bottom line

Both of your instincts are correct:

The template and extraction workflows must eventually reunite.
This is an unusually good moment to stabilize Git before the V2 phase begins.

The durable architectural principle is:

MDR tells us what the current system did. Extraction Review tells us what a pathway-first system should have seen. Harness testing determines which difference deserves to become code.

And Codex’s Git proposal is fundamentally sound as long as it remains a preservation-first stabilization sprint—not a destructive cleanup or a giant catch-all commit.